# NBA-Player-Similarity

## The Problem

There isn't any particular problem im looking to solve. However without a specific goal there is still plenty we can learn from an open-ended project. I will be looking at players from the 2017/2018 NBA season and looking for differences/similarities between them. To see if stats measure up to what fans and pundits hold up as truths about NBA players. NBA in recent years has become signifcantly more analytical, however, not everything can be measured with statsitics, and looking at individual stats in a game with 4 other players on the court only gives a fragmented view of the bigger picture. But even with this limitation, we can still gain insight through statsitics. I hope to come to some conclusions that we couldn't have reached by meerly glancing at the data, and hopefully find some interesting information about players.

## Data-Sets

Im going to using player data from the 2017-18 NBA regular season. The final data-set will be made up of three seperate data-sets which have been obtained from the websites, Basketball-reference and NBAminer.com. The first data-set from Basketball-reference is made up of the more traditional statistics (think points, rebounds assists). The player statistics have been normalized to 36 minutes of game-time as opposed to looking at per-game averages. The reason for normalizing by minutes-per-game is that it gives a fairer representation of each players contributions. If we looked at per-game statistics instead of per-36 players who play more minutes like LeBron James would look much better on paper then players like Steph Curry who plays less minutes because his team is much better. A player like Steph Curry often isn't required to play the end of a game because he is on the bench being rested. Theres an arguement to be made that this is unfair to players who play more minutes and that Lebron would possibly put up better per 36 numbers, if he played fewer minutes like Curry and wasn't forced to player longer increasing his exhaustion. Other stats like per-100-possessions exist which could be argued are better for evaluting a players impact, as they normalize a players stats by the teams pace. However, I think that statistic also has its draw backs as it reduces the impact of players who aren't go-to scoring options and therefore don't get used on possessions where the team is required to score in a rush. Unfortently, there isn't a perfect statistic which can rid of all bias. What we can do is try our best to minimize them and be concious of them when evaluating our results.  The second basketball-reference data-set we are using is made up of 'Advanced' statistics (think usage %, rebound %, fg %) from the same group of players as the first data-set. The third data-set is from a smaller website called NBAminer.com. This data-set has some more miscellaneous statistics (think points in the paint, fast break points). These stats offer a useful insight which tradiation statsitics do not offer. They don't just say that points were scored, but poitions on the court where they were scored. 

## Pre-processing: Data-cleaning

***Merging data sets and fixing mismatches***. Because the first two data-sets are from the same source merging these two are easy. The third datasets is from a different source so there are some discrepancies which need to eb addressed. The first thing is that there is information on 19 less players. Looking deeper we can see that there is in fact 45 total players which don't have any data oin the third. There are some small things we can do to reduce this number. In data-set one and two they have special characters for player names. For example J.J Barea, where are in the third these special characters have been removed. The solution is to remove the special characters from the first two data-sets. Some players have Suffixes or numerical values in their name (ex: IV) or (ex: Jr) these are also removed from the first two data-sets before we merge. The remaining names which are missing are players which have very limited minutes for very few games. I'm not going to add these players because they'd have been anyway.

***Removing features***. After merging the data-sets, repeated features need to be removed (ex: player name repeated). After this we need to remove redundant features (ex: team name). We also remove features such as ranking, its a meaningless indexing variable. Finally we also remove points-per-quater for all four quaters. The reason for this is because they are not normalized per-36 which isn't inline with our other attributes. 

***Feature Extraction***. After removing redundant features there are two more important features which we can extract. The first one is minutes-per-game. This can be calculated by taking the total minutes played (MP) and the total games played (G) and dividing these two numbers. This value will be used later to subset the data. The second is Assist-to-turnover ratio. This metric is a good indicator of how careless a player is with the ball on offense.

***Missing Values***. The only features which have missing values are Sp%, 2P%, FT% and TS%. After sub-setting our data-set, the only feature which has missing values is 3P%. The value is missing because there are players who have not attempted a single 3 pointer in the whole season. With this being the case, im going to replace the value with 0%. It seems reasonable to assume that if a player has not attempted a single 3 pointer, their shooting skills are proqabily similar to others who have attempted but not made a single 3 pointer throughout the season. After subsetting the data there are only 2 rows which are missing values. Replace these with 0.0 manually. 

***Sub-setting data***. The goal of this project is to make comparisons between players who make significant contributions to games. Therefore i'm going to remove players who do not play a significant amount of minutes per game. By doing this it will reduce clusters from getting to cluttered. I'm going to sub-set the data based on the value which was created previously, minutes per game. If a player has less then 28.5 minutes per game they will be removed from the data-set. By doing this the data-set is reduced to 100 players. After combining the 3 tables, feature-engineering and sub-setting our data, we have a data on 104 players with 50. features:





